---
layout: post
title: My Grandma
---
My Grandma
Our story begins in 1992 and it takes place at Iaçu, a country town of Bahia, a state in the northeast of Brazil. Iaçu was the place where fond memories with my grandma were created and 1992 was the year we meet each other, when I was born.
Happiness. 
I was just a child, the life was happening before my eyes, beyond my understanding, and what I remember is being with my grandma in her house, sitted together, asking questions to her, watching her smile answering my curiosity. We remember fondly about many times where I gently pulled the skin from her hand and asked why it was like that. The answer was always an affectionate laugh, a smile, and an explanation. Life was passing and there was always happiness surrounding me in that coziness moments.
Safety. 
I was a growing up kid and from time to time I was a rebel against a bath or I just got myself in some trouble with my mom because I would rather do something else than having a shower, like play free. My resistance just caused more trouble to me. In heated moments, my grandma was there and she always came with an aura of kindness to calm down my mother and to solve the conflicts in a peaceful way. She talked to me to listen to my mother and guided me to a better behaviour.
Patience. 
I could now understand the world better, at least I thought that. Now, the showers were not that problem, I had it myself. I began to observe that my family members had disagreements and that sometimes it bothered me so much. That I could not understand. My grandma observed this and after conducting a situation with patience towards the good, she came to me and showed me how this was part of life and by example I learned this principle of patience to conduct myself in challenging situations. A principle sown at that time and reaped the moment I had to deal with these situations in life. She was there when I was struggling while learning and I could learn and improve myself with her own example.
Coziness. 
Do you know this feeling? What are the moments that makes you smile and at the same time have tears in the eyes when you remember it? For me, right now, it is that time when my grandma and I sitted together on the couch to watch brazilian soap operas. She loved it. Every night that was the place to find her and during that hours we make reflections about some subject, we laughed about some scene, we got surprised by some climax in an episode. I liked to lay my head on her lap and she liked when I caressed her hair. I remember to understand and feel what joy means and, already in my adolescence, I extended that hours in the couch to just embrace that moment of coziness. In a certain period, that hours were extended when I kept watch NBA games late at night and I had to negotiate with my grandma about the volume of the TV.
Wisdom. 
Everyday at 6 pm, my grandma would go to her bedroom to pray. Every Sunday night, my mother, my grandma and I would gather to pray and read words of wisdom, positive messages, stories with uplifting messages. These were special moments. Moments to reflect, moments to enjoy in a mindful way each other's company. In a certain period, I concluded high school and I went to a larger city to continue my studies. I went there to prepare for the entrance exams. I was 17 years old. It was a challenge in many aspects. I was at home when I completed 18 years. Before getting back to the larger city, my grandma gave me a present and she said to me to only open it when I got there. I was so happy for the present. When I got there, I opened the present and it was a special book. She wrote a special dedication for me in a page of the book. I carry this book with me since then. Preserving it and the memories. In a daily basis, I read the book in the way that my grandma taught me. I open at a random part and read the two messages, one in each page. My grandma in this way shared with me her wisdom. The wisdom demonstrated by her in her actions through life.
Support. 
I passed the entrance exam to study engineering. I was 19 years old. I studied at home. My daily life at that time was myself studying at my bedroom and resting talking with my grandma or watching the news with her at noon and the soap operas at night. At this time, we also began to watch a morning program that she just loved so much. She liked to watch and to know about positive stories, about people doing good in this world and this program had that. So, after some months, I passed the entrance exam. She was so happy for me. I was moving to another city. On the eve of my change, she packed my bags so carefully that caught my attention how my clothes were so aligned and folded. At dawn on that moving day, I was awake alone, we have already said goodbye and hugged each other last night, and I cried so much in silence at that dawn with the image of these previous days, with the image of my grandma. I moved at morning. I faced it. We started talking daily by phone. In one of these recent days, we were talking about the courses and she gave me a present. She gave me my first book in my career path, a Calculus I book. In some weekends, I would go home. We spend great time together in these weekends. I remember a special day that we talked on the phone. It was late at night, I had a seminar to present and I was having a hard time preparing the presentation. I was stressed. She called me and it was a surprise given the time, she would be usually sleeping. We talked about that and instantly she calmed me down and made me feel serene and happy. So special and the years were passing in this way and I was about to graduate. My bond with my grandma makes me thought about my next steps. I didn't want to go so far. One day in one of that daily calls, out of the blue she said to me: "How I would like to see you in São Paulo, I would be so proud of you". I hadn't spoken to anyone in my family that I was thinking about applying to University of São Paulo for a master degree. She having told me was a tipping point in my life, in my career. I was approved in University of São Paulo and, again, I moved.
Saudades. 
In this moment, I find myself in São Paulo. During this master's journey, my grandma watched in that morning program a kid saying about the meaning of the word saudades. She was tolding me about this story in our daily calls and she enthusiastically told me the kid answered that saudade is the love that stays. During the conclusion of my masters, my grandma went to another plan in this indivisible life. My love for her stays here with me. Her faith, her principles and her legacy held me and comfort me. I am grateful to God for all the support. I am grateful to God for 1992, when I came to this world having a grandma like her.
